Lilliana Robinson: We'll share all of Mike's info at the end. Because I'm sure you guys are gonna wanna follow up with him. This is an awesome workshop. So what I've told them, Mike, is that this is one of our Chicago founders favorite workshops. They just started a growth month.
Lilliana Robinson: which is like month 2. So everybody here is like, deep in the weeds of iterating, experimenting, trying to sell, trying to grow. This is the perfect time for this workshop. You guys are gonna love. This Mike gives this every program pretty much, and he's super generous for this time feel free to you like people to just kind of jump in with questions. Right, Mike, so they could raise a hand or unmute. You're okay with that.
Mike Rome: Yeah, yeah, just I'm gonna share a deck and but
Mike Rome: I I rather than hear myself talk like just start yelling. I might not see hands. I'd rather I've got like a little over an hour, so I'd rather just be like just as helpful as humanly possible to you guys. So yeah, I I'm gonna cruise through kind of like principles for for growth, especially when you're earlier on, like, like mo, most of you here. But please just interrupt, and we can kind of do. QA. Throughout, and it'll be super casual.
Lilliana Robinson: Amazing. Well, thank you so much for your time again. This is just awesome. I know everybody's gonna really appreciate it. So I'll just hand it over to you, Mike.
Mike Rome: Okay, cool, is there?
Mike Rome: actually, why don't we? Just in the spirit of time? I I usually ask kind of for for intros on what everyone's doing. But I'm a little bit strapped for time today. So maybe we just start. And then when you guys start interrupting me, you can just tell me quickly what you do and give me like, you know, the 30 s pitch to to give me some context that can be more helpful, and questions you have. Does that work for everyone?
Lilliana Robinson: Yeah, they they should have like a one liner. They can just rattle off when they ask a question. So we'll do that.
Mike Rome: Awesome. I'm excited. Alright! Give me a sec. Share my screen.
Mike Rome: Alright cool. Everyone got my screen full full screen, building a growth machine slide.
Lilliana Robinson: Yep. Looks great.
Mike Rome: Okay, awesome. Remember, just start, just start yelling. And and I'll stop. Okay, cool. So yeah, this is a presentation. I actually built it a couple of years ago. But it was meant to be like pretty, pretty, timeless advice. So I think a lot of it is still pretty applicable.
Mike Rome: Little little bit about me. So I've been scaling 7 and 8 figure startups for like 13 years now. So I spent most of my career doing this in house, working my way up. Really series a to post series C venture back companies. So kind of ended as a full time exact.
Mike Rome: In December of 2021. I helped this food marketplace Startup go from 7 gigs to about 60 million in rep in a little over 5 years, and I ended as their Cmo. But a few 100 employees. And that was kind of one of the later stage experiences I had. And I did a lot of earlier stage stuff, too.
Mike Rome: And so I've been getting requests to like advise. And so basically, at the end of 2021, I decided, hey, like, maybe I'll just, you know, do this thing I've always done, which is, you know, helping grow 7 and 8 figure startups, really at the intersection of of marketing and products. So you know, keeping software startups super simple. I think they tend to grow 3 ways, sales, marketing and product. So I've spent most of my career at the the intersection of of marketing and product. Help them grow.
Mike Rome: So yeah, at the end of 2021 january 2022, I launched my own growth studio. It's called moonwater. You guys can check it out if you're interested. Just moonwater dot studio. So I I do the same work I've always done. I've I've worked with a small subset of startups, and I help them grow more predictably, repeatably and defensively,
Mike Rome: more recently, earlier this year, I launched a second brand. It's called Light Bulb run and we we tend to do more tactical work for startup. So things like Meta ads, Google ads, enhanced conversion tracking stuff like that. So yeah, moon waters like startup fractional operating advisory kind of high level stuff, and then light bulb is is more execution oriented. So been doing it for a while since I started moonwater. I've advised. A small subset of companies
Mike Rome: have raised about a quarter 1 billion dollars. I work with a small subset of startups at once. There's lots of advisors out there who work. We're like 10 or 15. I work with 3 to 4, just trying to like work with 3 to 4 really interesting ones and kind of we quality. Yeah, teach about the stuff like here over at Kellogg, Nda program. I'm I'm in the Midwest in Chicago. I'm actually heading over there later today.
Mike Rome: okay, enough. Like about me. The more important thing is, I've been doing this for a while. I've made a ton of mistakes and the whole point of the stack is to hopefully like, help. You guys not make some of those mistakes. So that's kind of quick intro on me. I'm gonna talk through like gosh, I don't even remember how many there might be like 12 or 13 principles around growth.
Mike Rome: Again, I I tend to work with more post product market fit probably a little later stage than than where some of you are at today. But I've tried to adapt a lot of those learnings and advice around growth to like what were the most important things. When I have done the earlier stage stuff that I wish somebody like told me so I could avoid, you know, some heartache and certainly save some time and stuff like that. So I'm gonna go through those now.
Mike Rome: anyone have any questions before I start riffing on the principles for growth.
Mike Rome: Okay? Awesome. So first one, I love this quote. Growth is optional. So
Mike Rome: growing a startup is really really hard. It requires constant discipline. It's days are full of like just continuing to get to more lives. Right? I think one of the best things you can do culturally is figure out like, how do you build a culture as a founder, and for your early team to just like.
Mike Rome: take bad news. Well, and just keep going, you know. Almost expect the bad news, because even the best startups are are pretty demoralizing. But I think if you can do that right, and if you can find a way to keep going, and one of the best hacks to do that is just be solving a problem, for you know, an Icp that you're just like really excited about and think you can spend the next 10 years on if you can do that stuff. Growth is optional. And so a big part of what I'm gonna teach you guys, today is like
Mike Rome: growing. A startup is really hard. But I actually think the roadmap is is very straightforward and very simple, and and most startups just kind of over complicate itself
Mike Rome: over complicated. And if you can be kind of brutally honest. And you know, you just have the right expectations about how hard it's gonna be. Actually think, like, yeah, the the playbook is pretty straightforward. I'm gonna kind of hit on sort of the cornerstones of that playbook? So yeah, for first quote, I think this is coined by the coined by the head of growth over at Facebook in the early days. He's now the Cmo but yeah, he just talks about how how growth is optional. And and really the
Mike Rome: the meeting there is, it's really up to you guys right whether you're pre your post product market fit finding product market fit and then scaling I think it's just up to you and and whether you have the discipline to stay focused and be really honest about progress or lack of progress, and and what to do next, and ultimately, just just to keep going. So there's lots of people and startups who talk about speed and and speed really matters. Because that's how you learn. And we're gonna get to that.
Mike Rome: But I think, actually, what's even more important than speed is stamina. There's this really cool Ryan holiday quote, that is not who is the fastest. It's who slows down the least and I think that's that's very true. True for startups. There's too many startups that kind of fizzle out because they burn out. They go too hard when in reality, like, you know. You know.
Mike Rome: you may get lucky you may be able to exit your startup in a few years. But you know, 9 times out of 10 that's not the case, and you should get ready for the the marathon over the spread.
Mike Rome: So principle number 2
Mike Rome: startups don't take off founders. Make them take off. So this is a Paul Graham. Quote.
Mike Rome: everyone's out West. So I'm I'm sure you're familiar with yc, and and Paul Graham. There's also kind of as an aside here. There's there's so many people talking about startups right? And and what you should do, including me right like you should. You should. Sort of take my advice, maybe with a grain of salt right? Like, corroborate it with other people. And
Mike Rome: I I I think one of the best things like early teams can do is just like go heads down on on making their startup take off and like, really, just like ignoring the Internet, ignoring other people, ignoring Linkedin, ignoring twitter. And this is one of my favorite lessons. One of my favorite quotes the whole idea of startups. They they don't take off founders. Make them take off. So if you look at all of these awesome startups on the left hand side.
Mike Rome: they all went through. Sort of this. This illustration that you see on the right, called the process and and basically the takeaway here is like, you know, you hear the stories. You see the valuations of the instacards of pinterest the Airbnb's of the world. But if you really peel back the layers like on how they got started there was a lot of willing things into existence in in the early days, like one of my favorite
Mike Rome: Ben Silverman. Stories of Pinterest was like in the early days he used to go into apple stores, and he would switch the safari browser home screen to pinterest, and people would come in and they would like, think about buying a macbook, and they would like go and pull it up, and they would see Pinterest.
Mike Rome: And you know they would just kind of start tinkering because it was right there and then, like he would go over. And he would do like user interviews, right? Or airbnb. There's like the famous story of how those guys, almost like ran out of money in the early days, because, you know, sounds so obvious now, like you should write your place out. But when they started basically, the common response was like, You want me to go stay with someone else in New York City.
Mike Rome: No, thanks. I don't want to get murdered. And so they just
Mike Rome: we're grinding. And they ended up they were designers and I forget which election it was Obama and somebody else, but they decided that they were gonna like, Make Wheaty's boxes with both Presidential candidates on it. And so it had nothing to do with their startup but they bank like 60 or 80 grand. I don't remember what it was to just kind of put some money in the bank and keep going. And there's all these amazing examples of
Mike Rome: these amazing startups who did things that didn't scale in the early days. And you know, we're the founders really like took it upon themselves to to will things into existence. So you know, don't you know, don't. Don't make the mistake of thinking that like they didn't go through the demoralization and the grind and the hard times. It's there for every startup.
Mike Rome: even the most successful ones. And so yeah, just build habits to, you know, founders make things take off themselves. And I said, like, I said, like instilling that culture with your team. Of course you're gonna get to this place where, like.
Mike Rome: you can't just do things that don't scale all the time. But but Airbnb was another great example of this with like you know the the whole idea to overcome that objection that I just kind of like jokingly talked about right like people not wanting to stay with someone else in New York City. I was only like half joking. I mean, that was largely consumer insight that they got. And so one of the insights that they had was like, we need to take really beautiful
Mike Rome: photos of these places in order to overcome this objection right? This consumer objection. And so the founders, Brian and Joe they were design people. They had like great taste, great eye. They just went in and started shooting photography for, like their earliest customers in New York City.
Mike Rome: So the places look beautiful, right like if if they started and said like, we're never gonna build a billion dollar company by going into. You know, people's apartments in New York City. Just so we can get like the first 20 listings on Airbnb to look beautiful and incredible.
Mike Rome: They might have never actually like gotten anywhere with Bmb. Airbnb. And so it's really important to kind of balance this idea of like. Yes, you want to figure out scalable activities. But I think one of the best things you can do early on is like, cultivate this in your DNA where you're doing things that don't scale. And ultimately the reason that works so well is because it forces you to talk to customers. And you know, th, there's few better activities in the early days, and constantly talking to customers and and letting that inform what you do next.
Mike Rome: So principle number 3,
Mike Rome: sustainable growth means mastering scale and unit economics. So this is a little bit more obvious now, given like the macro environment. And you know just how funding is softer, and it's harder than it was a a few years ago. But we're gonna continue to go through cycles, and you know, economy is gonna like pop off again and raising venture is gonna be easier. And you know, I don't know if that'll be in 2 years or 4 years. But it's gonna happen we just continue to go through these cycles.
Mike Rome: I think one of the important things to to not forget when money's easier. And you know, things are going really well. Is that like to build it an incredible startup like.
Mike Rome: there's this product market fit definition that's like, build something people want actually think a much more accurate one is is, build something people need. You want to build something that's not just a nice to have you want something that's gonna solve like a morphine problem. But even beyond building something that people need, there's this whole second half of it that's like, build something people need that they're also willing to pay for right in a way that's profitable for your startup.
Mike Rome: and it's easy to lose sight, especially in the early days, like you could throw up some, you know, Meta Ads or Google ads, or whatever, and and get some quick users and and stuff like that. But one of the things to just be really mindful of is like.
Mike Rome: can we do this profitably? And you know, maybe maybe some of you post text stars want to raise a lot of venture, in which case you'll kind of lean on the growth side of the spectrum. But I still think you need to be mindful of unit economics. And maybe some of you, you know, there's always people who go through techstars and kind of are like, it's like a one and done raise. Or maybe they're gonna raise one more small round and you're just really interested in profitability.
Mike Rome: Both sides of this equation are really important. And when you find marketing and sales and product levers to grow, you can't just think about one or the other right one without the other isn't good enough. So channels that get you lots of customers where the unit economics don't make sense, and then other channels that have wonderful unit economics, but no scale they don't really work right? So you're on the hunt to to figure out both.
Mike Rome: Sounds obvious. A lot of this advice is obvious. But when you're in it, it's really hard to, you know, it's really easy to lose sight of of the big picture around this stuff.
Mike Rome: one of my favorite books is this book called Traction when it comes to figuring out like how do you find channels with growth and good unit economics. They have some really cool frameworks in it. And yeah, I I will share this deck with everyone after. So you guys can just like clink up the links directly. There's a link to the traction book. But really simple framework. For how do you start to finish tasks to find, you know, marketing channels and other types of levers that have scale and and good unit economics. But both really matter.
Mike Rome: Okay, cool. So this is one of my my favorite graphs in Startup. So the most important formula for growth is this whole idea of new customers plus reactivated customers
Mike Rome: plus retain customers. So there's a really cool venture fund out there, called social Capital. It was started by Shimoth Polyapatia.
Mike Rome: Lot of you probably know him. He's he's on the all in podcast he started the growth team at Facebook, made a bunch of money, owned part of the Golden State warriors at one time. I think he sold it but he started this venture fund called Social capital, and I think it's it's mostly just him now. It used to be like a bigger team. I think it's mostly just him. But one of the really cool things they did. And I would recommend everyone. Google is if you just Google, like social capital
Mike Rome: diligence framework. They basically like open, sourced a lot of how they do diligence and how they decide to fund companies. And and they were kind of funding all types of companies at the time. So whether you're consumer company, whether your sas marketplace, whatever
Mike Rome: they kind of looked at them all, and
Mike Rome: one of my favorite articles is it? It's like a 5 part sort of medium series where they talk about like the mathematical side of of how they do diligence right? And one of the things that's so cool about that is like this is one of the most rigorous funds in in the world, and they're telling you how they like measure startups to figure out like, if it's a very high quality business, right? And so, even if you're not raising money, you can go take those frameworks, and you know you can measure your startup in that light and and figure out how good you are! Of course there's this whole side of diligence that
Mike Rome: isn't as numerical and measurable right like founder attributes, founder market fit stuff like that, but for, like the mathematical side of of quantifying growth, and that's at a diligent state, they kind of give it all away. And the first 2
Mike Rome: the first 2 like sort of essays in this 5 part series. Talk about this whole idea of the ways you grow active customers, and I I believe the first one talks about it in the context of consumer startups, and the second one talks about it in the context of of sas startups. So you know that that should cover off on a fair amount of you. But go take a look at it because they're they're big. Point is it's really easy for a startup to show
Mike Rome: top line growth. Right? So let's say, you, you want to show like top line revenue growth or top line customer growth. Everyone's seen the classic sort of like hockey stick
Mike Rome: chart there, right? And what these guys kind of called out was the whole idea of like, hey? Okay, let's let's keep things super simple for a sec. Let's let's talk about like a consumer startup where you have you know your active customers are either new, they're reactivated. They're retained again, the take a look at the article, the Sas calculations a little bit more complex because you have
Mike Rome: you know. Th, there's a few more inputs to the calculation. But it's the same idea. And basically what they talk about is like, okay, let's say, we're in April right now. Right? So let's say, we're talking about active customers A new customer is one who comes in for the first time in April, right? They use the product for the first time in April. A reactivated customer is one who uses it. In April, too. They did not use it in March, but they used it in some immediate in some preceding period before March. Right? So there was like this gap in their usage. And then there's retained
Mike Rome: also active in April and May were active in the immediate preceding month, which happens to be march right? So those are 3 mutually exclusive types of customers. And they sum to your total actives.
Mike Rome: And the big point of this article was, you can basically show, you know,
Mike Rome: you can show this up into the right sort of chart, right like this is an actual company I worked on that had a compound monthly growth rate of total customers of about 10% month over month. Not that.
Mike Rome: But when you peel back the layers. Sorry. This is 2 companies that we're both growing at at 10% month over month top line. When you peel back the layers and you figure out, how are they growing?
Mike Rome: The company on the left was growing predominantly because of new customers, and they were churning a lot of those customers. So they still had this this monthly growth rate. That was 10% month over month the Re. But but new was holding it up right new in this equation of act as equal, new plus reactivated plus retain was driving it, whereas this other company on the right they weren't as good at customer acquisition yet, but they were retaining incredibly well.
Mike Rome: And so the social capital article talks about this idea of a quick ratio which basically says for every customer, you're gaining, how many are you losing?
Mike Rome: So in other words, it's not just about top line growth. 2 companies can have the exact same top line growth, but they can have a very different what they call a quick ratio. So, for example, this consumer company on the left for every one customers it was gaining. It was losing one right, so it was almost losing as many customers as they were gaining, whereas the company on the right for every 1.7 customers they were gaining, they were losing about one. So 1.1 versus
Mike Rome: 1.7 games to to one loss might not seem like a lot, but for a consumer company. That's massive. So the second article talks about this for Saas companies. The quick ratio sort of benchmarks are different. You want to be much higher than you know. One and a half to 2 but take a look at these articles like the it's okay, if, like, the math is a little bit fuzzy right now. But the the whole idea is like you can fake growth right? You can fake but you can't fake healthy growth.
Mike Rome: And the way that you figure out if your growth is healthy or not? Is, are you just growing by acquiring new users? Are you also growing by retaining and reactivating old ones?
Mike Rome: So just talk about this. I'm gonna kind of fly through it. But that that whole calculation of, you know, for every customer you're gaining how many you're losing really keeps you honest on your top line growth. It's called the quick ratio they talk about in the article. It's one of my favorite calculations to figure out if you have product market fit right? If you're growing customer acquisition. But you're not retaining. You probably don't have product market fit. That's not bad.
Mike Rome: Right? Like, if you're growing customers. Clearly, something you're doing is resonating. Right? People are coming into a landing page. They're trying your product. They're just not sticking around. So the message is working. The product just hasn't delivered on the promise yet, so so don't get discouraged. If you're growing largely off of new it should just like be a reality check for what your priorities should be. You shouldn't continue to spend money, or even focus that much on organic customer acquisition
Mike Rome: until you talk to users, and you kind of fix what's wrong with a leaky product, and then, you know, get enough users to come in to validate that you fix that. And, as you know, retention shows that you have fixed that you can start to to to turn on the new customer acquisition. Stick it again.
Mike Rome: Alright cool. So that was a little bit about like how I think about growth in in the context of products with new reactivated and retained. But another big thing I do is is marketing related growth. So I think the biggest message around marketing early on for companies is marketing's purpose. Pre and post product market fit. They're they're very different. And it. It's really tempting. If you figure out a customer acquisition channel that's working for your business.
Mike Rome: It's really tempting to to just go harder on it. But one of the big questions I have is, is, are you ready to go harder on it. And so one of the reasons I love the quick ratio and the social capital analysis that I just alluded to is because it's it's it's, you know, there's lots of people out there who have definitions of product market fit. You know, surveys all this stuff. I think the way to be brutally honest about. If you have, it is the quick ratio calculation that I just showed you.
Mike Rome: So let's assume that the quick ratio isn't strong. Right? You're growing, but you're not retaining a lot of these people. Your pre- product market fit.
Mike Rome: The whole goal of marketing, then is you just want to bring in enough customers. So as you're iterating on the product to improve retention, you're constantly getting feedback to figure out if you're better
Mike Rome: right, but you certainly don't want to be spending tens of thousands of dollars on customer acquisition yet. Right? Maybe spend 1,000 bucks one month because you want to bring, you know. 50 users in to figure out if some of these changes you made to your product, based on talking to users are helping them retain. That's totally fine. But that's the used case for marketing right? When your post product market fit, you've validated that you've built something people need
Mike Rome: evidenced by the quick ratio. Right? You're retaining users right? And you're very much ready for growth then marketing purposes scaling right? And so that goes back to the whole sort of insight. I had a few slides ago on the purpose of, you know. Really, good growth is scale and unit economics. Then you can go.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Ask a question, mind.
Mike Rome: Tactics. Of course.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: We're building a regenerative marketplace. We've learned that regenerative is not necessarily what we lead with for the customer. So we, in the super early phase. We're iterating. We're looking for our first 10 customers, but because it's travel. I was curious. It's not like a software you ideally use month after month. Most people they travel once a year. If we'll if we're lucky.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: how how do you measure it? In that case.
Mike Rome: So can you talk to me a little bit more about what regenerative means in this context.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: In this context, I think it what we've learned. It doesn't matter as much for us. It means that you leave the places better than you find them, and the way we do it.
Mike Rome: Interesting.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Integrate suppliers, hotels, activities, all kinds of different immersive off the beaten path, things that already do all the work so that our guests can enjoy themselves and have a deeper, more culturally immersed experience. And the regenerative part, we've learned goes on the back end now. Because that's not necessarily what people look for when they go looking for the next vacation.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: We're piloting in the Hawaii. So even more so a case where people, some people go to Hawaii every year. Most people probably don't. So I think getting getting customers to come back to us until we are global is probably hard.
Mike Rome: Well, a few, a few ideas. Lisa. So the the first thing I would say is,
Mike Rome: yeah. So what are you guys leading with, if you're not leading with regenerative. Now, what are you leading.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: It's like.
Mike Rome: For the value.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Immersive off the beaten path experiences and the product we're testing out right now on top of the marketplace that we have in the back end is the customized local experts, itineraries that you get from real humans in the real places, who understand, like the local experience rather than AI generated itineraries set up just the same.
Mike Rome: Cool. Cool. So a couple a couple of thoughts. So one, yeah, like you. In terms of of of measuring. If you're pre your post product marketed, I mean, the first thing I would say is like you, you're pre customers. Is that right?
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Oh, yeah, yeah, we definitely pre, I'm just curious about what you if you measure it in the same way when it's not something that is easily repeatable, like a software. For example.
Mike Rome: Totally totally makes sense. Yeah. So so the answer is, no right like, if you're if you were building like software, for you know, certain Hr activities like people aren't gonna use those at the same frequency that they use social apps right? Just like they're not gonna use them at the same frequency as yours. So the first answer is, yeah, like, you, wanna figure out like, what is sort of the goal like, what are you running towards. Is it twice a year? Is it? 3 times a year?
Mike Rome: I might also think about? I like the idea that you're only in like you're you're focused on Hawaii, I would think, because you want to figure out one or 2 markets. Believe quality. Really figure out the playbook before you scale. Don't want to spray too early.
Mike Rome: One thing you might think about is, what are some of these places that might not be Hawaii? Where people do come back at a more regular cadence, right? And so, if it's like
Mike Rome: off the beaten path sort of travel experiences, you know, I'm thinking about like people who do this might be like a terrible example. But, like, you know, people who do like iron, man's right like they tend to be in the some of them tend to be in the same spot right, and they might continue to do them.
Mike Rome: Iron Man's might be a bad example. My point is, is like. There's probably these like extreme sort of events. That are a little bit indicative of like someone's adventurous. They like off the beaten travel, and they also might come back multiple times like I. I know people who hike the Grand Canyon every year. You know, it's like sort of this, this thing that they do. So one piece of advice is like, try to figure out, are there like events, or even places that are kind of a leading indicator that sorry I'm gonna hit my
Mike Rome: video. Here, give me one sec. Cause I froze.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Frozen a great position, though.
Mike Rome: Yeah, I could. It could be a could be much worse right?
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: The.
Mike Rome: Alright!
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Always.
Mike Rome: Alright one sec.
Lilliana Robinson: Do you need to stop and reshare Mike.
Mike Rome: Yeah. Let's give a shot.
Chloe Lannert: In the meantime, Lisa and Area, you might want to explores Mexico. I feel like people end up in the same area
Chloe Lannert: year after year, like, I know a couple of folks who end up in that pattern. But
Chloe Lannert: they're interested in like different experiences each time, and they don't necessarily go back to the same hotels, so that might be a spot to start.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Yeah, I think Hawaii to a lot of people come back year after year. I was just curious. If it's it's a yearly rate like ratio, then. So to measure retained customers? Or is it more?
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: I don't. I mean, yeah, I think I was just curious about that of like, how long
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: is it like they come back in 2 years? Is that still a retained customer? And how do you measure that now? Oh.
Mike Rome: So I think you gotta. You gotta work. You gotta work backwards a little bit. So
Mike Rome: like. What I would say is like, figure out like, what unit economics do, we think makes sense for your business right? And then like. And then you can kind of answer this question, do you need them to be annual customers, or is every other year sufficient?
Mike Rome: You know. I think you want to figure out a way to bake retention into your business. Just because going back to
Mike Rome: this sort of equation, there's there's kind of 3 types of customers. So there's the the new ones. There's the ones who come back, but they come back less frequency. And there's one that continues to. It's just much harder to grow if you can't pull on all of those. So I would kind of think through, like, you know. And I I know it's like early. But like, how much are you thinking you're gonna make per customer and then figure out, okay.
Mike Rome: what's sort of like the hopeful Ltv of this customer. And that would kind of tell you, do you need them to come 2 or 3 or 4 times or maybe just once a year.
Mike Rome: That would be like a good place to start. But I think, like thinking through like, how do you bake some retention to your model, whether it's once a year, or even, you know, when you get into like the once every other year. It does get hard
Mike Rome: just because you can't like count on retention for growth as much. But that might be an interesting insight for you to kind of like tweak and rework the business model like, maybe there's some sort of angle or offer to get people to figure out recurring revenue right like, could you again? Th, these could be terrible ideas. But like a community for once, people go like to kind of bond over these interesting travel experiences. Right? That might be a garbage one. But the whole idea of like thinking through.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Everyone loves committing.
Mike Rome: It. It's okay. If people don't use your product every day like the North Star is through the unit. Economics makes sense right? Like, can I make enough off of a customer and get them to come back where there's this lifetime value, that I can like. Use that money to have some profits and also go back and find more customers, and if the answer is no, then I would kinda like rethink retention. But 150 like you like. There's plenty of great businesses that have people use a product.
Mike Rome: you know, 2, 3 times a year. You don't need to be a social app where people, you know they're looking for like everyday usage.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Yeah, does that fall under, reactivate it or retain? Then.
Mike Rome: I think you could it. No, so.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: And probably.
Mike Rome: That is.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Exists.
Mike Rome: No, I think that I think to start how you should think about it is yeah. How do we get people to come back and pay us again. But then I would say, like, in terms of reactivated, you figure out your definition of what is sort of the regular cadence, right? And so if it's annual, if someone comes back annually, they would be considered retained.
Mike Rome: If they came back every other year I would consider them reactivated. Assuming annual was sort of where you were going. So yeah, start, everyone's definition of like, what's the regular cadence will be different. So start with that, and that sort of dictates retained versus reactivated.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Thanks, so much.
Mike Rome: No problem. So yeah, pre and post product market fit. Just really important to understand where you're at, because it dictates your startups priorities. Right. Are you ready for scale? Are you ready to test marketing in sales? Or you really need to focus on product and retention before you can scale
Mike Rome: If you get about marketing again, I would. I would really study that book traction. I mentioned a few few slides ago. Really simple frameworks, for how do you start and finish tasks to find marketing channels with scale and good unit economics? But I I'm a big framework person. It's really easy to be busy in startups. And so I like to use frameworks kinda distill down what's like noise. What's the small subset of things we need to really focus on and do well. And so one of the classic ones I like for marketing is the whole idea of like all marketing, is either awareness, consideration or conversion.
Mike Rome: Right? So awareness is.
Mike Rome: you know, sort of top of funnel stuff. Prospects know who you are. Consideration is they not only know who you are. They know your value right? They know you need value proposition. They know, like, why you're different than if you sat around the table of 10 other competitors and adjacent companies what's very unique and and and different about yours. And then, obviously, conversion, right? Once people know who you are, once they know your value. You need a playbook to convert and retain them. So in the earlier days, you're gonna be focused on the lower funnel stuff.
Mike Rome: right? Most of your marketing activities, assuming you're ready to scale should be conversion focus. And then, as you scale and you start to like, tap out some of those very direct response marketing efforts. They're gonna get harder. It's gonna get harder to make the unit economics of those make sense as you're getting more and more customers. You wanna plant seeds further up the funnel. Right? And so, you know, at the end of the day you can't.
Mike Rome: You can't build a 20 million or 50 million dollar company just slinging paid ads. You need to go higher up the funnel. You need to be more creative. You need to be different but when it comes to just kind of like getting the plane off the ground the sort of conversion focused marketing and advertising can can really do the trick
Mike Rome: alright. So I mentioned earlier, keeping things super simple. There's 3 ways. A lot of your companies will grow marketing sales and product. And when I say product that includes like customer support
Mike Rome: as well. There's this concept of a growth team which a fair amount of you may have heard of, especially if you come from larger companies. Like a small concentrated sort of like special Ops group that's like really responsible for growth. These could be helpful in companies that have like a hundred plus people. But I really think like.
Mike Rome: so, a lot of what I'm talking about today is is is not just the hard skills for growth. It's the soft skills, right? Some of that earlier stuff, willing things into existence.
Mike Rome: finding ways to build a culture where people don't get demoralized like these are less obvious things that help with growth. But the soft skills are just as important. This is another one of those. So I don't like the idea of growth teams. If a company has less than a hundred people which is, you know, presumably where your companies will be for for a little while. I think of the whole company as the growth team. And like I said earlier, it's really easy to be busy and startups. I think one of the most helpful things you can do is
Mike Rome: list out the departments right? Or you know, let's say you have 2 or 3 or 4 people right now, and you just think through like, what are the current levers for growth? And is the whole team using their unique skill sets and previous experiences to solve these problems. So one of the best things you can do culturally is not have growth. The marketing's job or products job or sales jobs. You want it to be everyone's job.
Mike Rome: And not only are you gonna like find growth way faster that way. It's much better for your culture teams are gonna get way, less demoralized. I advise a lot of companies where
Mike Rome: marketing sales or product one of the teams is, is kind of carrying a lot of the weight, and they're a little bit resentful, and
Mike Rome: it just usually doesn't end well. And so you really want to build a culture of. You know whether your founder, whether you're a customer support person, whether you're employee number one, everyone's job.
Max Pinckney: But listen.
Mike Rome: Right. And we're just using our unique skill sets and experiences to to get there. So
Mike Rome: cool. So another one for you guys, there's there's back to frameworks like there's 4 stages to growth. And just like it's really important to understand. If your pre your post product market fit for marketing purposes.
Mike Rome: It's really important just to understand in general, because it dictates how your team should spend time. So I think about the 4 stages of growth for a startup. This, this whole idea of like making something people need or want. And we'll pay for right as the first one. That's how you get that's product market fit. Once you get to that, you can hypothesize models for growth
Mike Rome: doesn't again. I'm gonna keep talking this time. So we just don't waste time.
Mike Rome: Sorry guys. One sec.
Mike Rome: Cool, Mac.
Mike Rome: Everyone. Everyone got my screen again.
Chloe Lannert: Good.
Mike Rome: Cool. This is a good lesson for startups, right? Everyone's got a plan to get punched in the face.
Mike Rome: So I plan. I plan this right?
Mike Rome: anyway. So so there's these these 4 stages of growth. And the reason they're important is because it dictates your priorities. So first one getting to product market fit making something up people want. I'll pay for once you get there, you've earned the right to hypothesize models for growth. And so I'm gonna get in the next slide. Some of my favorite models to use to figure out like, what is your engine for growth
Mike Rome: when you're doing that? The whole idea is like you. Wanna test ideas really quickly to kind of validate and figure out your growth model. And then the last thing that you're gonna wanna do is as you're trying to figure out like your hypothesizing models for growth. You're testing ways.
Mike Rome: You want to record learnings. And the really important thing about recording learnings is like, it's how you get this growth flywheel spinning. And I'm gonna get. I'm gonna come back to it in a second. So most startups. They try tons of stuff, but they don't actually like, take enough time to think and record learnings, and like reflect on where they write or where they wrong and
Mike Rome: kind of let that inform what they do next. Again, it's super easy to be busy in the startup, and one of the best things startups can do is like actually slow down to to move faster. So I'm gonna kinda kinda explain that. But as it relates to Stage 2, and the idea of hypothesizing models for growth
Mike Rome: when I send this deck out. Here's sort of like 5 frameworks. When I think about all the the startups like since I started moonwater, I've worked on maybe 13 or so. How we've grown has has has
Mike Rome: pretty much come back to leveraging one of these models or multiple of these models to like. Figure out what our growth engine was. So the first one is sort of like the sort of like old school framework for growth. It's it's called funnels or aarr just stands for acquisition, activation, retention, referral and revenue? So those are 5 levers for growth. Acquisition is, how do we get people to this thing that we built right? These assets that we have activation? How do we get them to to do what we want
Mike Rome: and then retention, how do we get them to continue to do what we want?
Mike Rome: And then
Mike Rome: also referral, how do you get people to have such like a great experience that they become the marketers for you, and then the last one is revenue. So whether you're pre or post revenue, how do you get them to engage in? You know some sort of monetization behavior? Or if if you're post revenue, how do you get them to engage in more of it, so can everyone still hear me, even when I'm like.
Lilliana Robinson: Yeah, we can hear.
Chloe Lannert: It was good.
Mike Rome: Awesome, awesome. So if I have to kind of keep fixing this, I'll I'll just keep talking. So the final framework some people call it like startup metrics for pirates. And
Mike Rome: because a a RRR
Mike Rome: is an acronym that sounds like a pirate are okay, cool share screen.
Mike Rome: Sweet? So so that's like an older school. 1 one of the reasons I really like that. That framework for growth is acquisition, activation, retention, referral and revenue. They hit on theme things. Every team can do, sales, marketing and product cool. So a couple of other ones. I won't spend too much time on this, because I want to do a bunch of QA. At the end.
Mike Rome: growth loops this is sort of like a newer model. If any of you guys have heard of Reforge and Brian Bell, for you've got some really interesting theories on how growth loops are a better way to grow them funnels. There's this whole concept of product led growth. Network effects. I'm sure you guys have heard of it. Many of the biggest, best companies
Mike Rome: Facebook, Linkedin blah, blah, blah, basically, the product gets better and better the user experience. There's more incentive to use it as more and more people join network effect products are incredible. But just because you don't have a network effects, product
Mike Rome: doesn't mean that you don't have a good startup, so sort of like the Holy Grail for growth. But I work on plenty of awesome companies that have grown through much more traditional methods like like funnels and and stuff like that. So take a look at all of these. And then I would say, you guys can email me anytime. If you got questions on, you know the different sort of models for growth, or if there's other ones that you're interested in. I'm happy to to riff on that, too.
Mike Rome: All right.
Mike Rome: try start. Video, one more time.
Mike Rome: Cool. Okay. I only got a couple more, and then we can do some. QA. So
Mike Rome: ice is the best way to kind of build and execute a growth roadmap. So let's say, you guys are ready for growth, right. And you're trying to think through marketing sales, product levers to scale.
Mike Rome: even if you're not there. Right? If you're still pre product market fit. And you're trying to figure out what you should do next to get to product market fit. Keep it simple. One of my favorite frameworks for for prioritization is is ice. And so it's just an acronym for impact confidence and effort.
Mike Rome: So basically, when it comes to to figuring out what your startup should do right again, super easy to be busy in the startup doesn't mean anything. You want to be effective. Usually that means you should do less. So you need to figure out a really thoughtful way to prioritize, and what you should say yes to, and what you should say no to. So basically, what ice means is, you know. Let's say, you guys are trying to get to the product market fit. You got some really good customer feedback. And you're trying to decide on, like.
Mike Rome: you know, 5 product features to build. When you're trying to figure out which one you should do. First, ask yourself these 3 questions. So
Mike Rome: if feature one was successful. What's its impact? That's what the I stands for. Right? What's it gonna do for revenue? What's it gonna do for retention? Whatever sort of the North Star is that you're you're gunning to solve? In that specific context, the next thing to ask is like, what's our level of confidence that it's it's gonna work, right? If something is really high impact.
Mike Rome: If it works. But you have like a really low confidence in it, working right? There's not other adjacent companies or competitors who've done this and figured it out. There's not sort of like secondary research that suggests it's a good idea, whatever. You don't have any like
Mike Rome: customer feedback. That says it's a good idea. It's probably not. The first thing you're gonna do, because even if the impact is high, your confidence is really well. And then the last thing that that's most important in the earliest days of a startup is ease. So let's say, something's high impact. And you have high confidence. The last question to ask is like, What's it gonna take to put this thing into the world
Mike Rome: right? Like, if we're building a new product feature to help retention, is it? Gonna take one developer, is it? Gonna take a desire developer? Do we not even need them? Right could be like a no code thing that a found a non technical founder could do. You guys kind of get the point how many hours is gonna take. But ice is a really effective framework. Again, whether your Pre or post product market fit. Figure out what's a small subset of stuff we really want to say yes to. And what's the stuff we're gonna pass on for now? Because we really just want to bleed quality and do the work of our lives on a few things, the the things that matter most
Mike Rome: cool. So so principle number 12, velocity is it's it's the number one input to find the fastest path to growth. So there's this flywheel to grow a startup. Okay? And it looks like I should really just
Mike Rome: put a flywheel illustration on the slide. It would be way better. But I haven't yet. So so check out that first bullet the flywheel. Is this. So if you're trying to figure out ways to grow you wanna try lots of stuff right? You wanna run tests right? But then, after you run those tests
Mike Rome: the sorry. The reason that you want to run those tasks is because you want to get the learnings. And
Mike Rome: the reason you want the learnings is because the learnings lead to better tests, and then the better test lead to higher success rates, and ultimately you get to the fastest path growth. So the whole reason that velocity matters is because to kick off this flywheel and do more stuff and get more learnings that lead to better tests and higher success rates. It all starts with speed, right? And so it's really important to just kind of like, you know, when in doubt do
Mike Rome: I think the best startups they just they just have this like incredible bias for action
Mike Rome: early on
Mike Rome: it's something that can can really help you get ahead. Because basically, you build learnings way faster than than everybody else.
Mike Rome: And that's really important. I'm gonna kill my video for the rest of the presentation and see if it see if it helps at all, and I'll turn it back on. We do. QA.
Mike Rome: I'm almost done here.
Mike Rome: Okay, cool principle number 13.
Mike Rome: outside of moving very quickly, to really kick off that growth, flywheel and and get more learnings to, you know. Have more, you know. Stack more wins, and find the fast path to growth. The other thing that's really important, that I find a lot of early stage startups fall down. And is this whole idea like, I told you earlier. It's really important to capture learning, so I always tell startups like move as fast as you can. So long as you stay in control. I come in and advise a lot of startups who are doing lots of stuff.
Mike Rome: And you know, let's say, let's say the startup is just post product market fit. They're trying to scale they're testing a new customer acquisition strategy on Youtube. And and I come in and they say, oh, Youtube doesn't work for a business. And I say, Okay, like, that's fine. Mo, most things you try won't work for your startup. That's that's why you need to try a lot of stuff.
Mike Rome: But they start to peel back the layers and ask them about like, okay, like, talk to me about the test design right? Like, how you ran like, Youtube customer acquisition, right? Like, what was the hypothesis? What did you guys actually do? You know what were the results? What did you learn? And I started to ask these questions. And I realized, like.
Mike Rome: sometimes, there's not good answers, right? Like, like, maybe we ran a test. Maybe the outcomes weren't really good. But no one actually like recorded the outcomes right? No one actually like went back and said, okay, we have this hypothesis of why Youtube could be good for our business. It wasn't. And let's ask ourselves why and extract some sort of learning right? Maybe it wasn't good, because, like, you didn't actually like architect, the campaign in a thoughtful way.
Mike Rome: Maybe you didn't follow best practices, or maybe you did all that, and it still wasn't good, in which case you should move on but the reason that learnings are really important is because most of the things you try as a startup are going to fail. And so, in order to not have that failure be in vain. You want to say, like, Okay, what do we learn from this? Let's log it in like a learnings log, and let's commit it to memory. So when we prioritize right like, when we ruthlessly prioritize
Mike Rome: everything else that we're doing every week. We can constantly cite these learnings to to prioritize better right? And so the best thing you can do is run a test that's gonna help you get to
Mike Rome: product market fit because it's helping you solve a retention problem, or it's gonna help you scale because your post product market fit. The best thing that can happen is it works but 9 times out of 10, even for great companies, it's not gonna work so like. Don't have those other 10 experiments being vain, learn something from them, and commit that stuff to memory, socialize it with the team, and constantly come back to it to inform what you do next.
Mike Rome: Alright cool. I think I just got 2 more. So when you do find stuff that works to the whole point of like, even for great teams that execute really quickly. They capture learnings. Most tests. They'll fail
Mike Rome: when you do sign, find stuff that works double down on it. So so another common mistake, I see, is, you know, I come into a startup. And you know, let's say, 80% of their growth is coming from one or 2 channels. So you definitely wanna have a chip on your shoulder and say, Hey, this, you know, these one or 2 channels. They're gonna saturate. They're gonna go away. We're not gonna be able to rely on them forever. So let's use a small subset of our time to to plant new seeds right? So when this thing does saturate, we're not totally burned.
Mike Rome: but make no mistake. You should still spend the majority of your time making that thing work as well as possible for as long as possible.
Mike Rome: and that all comes back to like. It's just very hard to find stuff that works so once a while come into companies that are that are growing at a really nice clip. And there's 2 or 3 channels that are doing it. And instead of doing the work of their lives on those 2 to 3 channels, they're like, Oh, we can replicate the success in 2 to 3 others. That that very rarely happens. So it's not to say that you shouldn't plant seeds in the other 2 to 3. Again, it's really important to
Mike Rome: find continuous ways to grow as you know, markets get competitive. Cha, you know, tactics channel saturate and stuff like that. But it should be a small subset of your time really hard to find channels, tactics, and levers that work. So whether they're product sales or marketing when you do just go as hard as humanly possible, like milk them for all their work.
Mike Rome: And the last thing that I have to say to everyone before I open up to QA. Is,
Mike Rome: yeah, make time to play offense. So especially in the early days,
Mike Rome: you're gonna scramble a lot right like there's just so much to do in your startup to to kind of get things off the ground and to show a little bit of traction.
Mike Rome: but but like don't conflate, busy and effective. And so I I thought a lot about this because I've never met a startup, you know. In my opinion. Again, you guys should corroborate this stuff. Figure out. Figure out who you want to believe. Don't talk to too many people avoid most of the Internet. But in in my experience I've never met a startup that couldn't benefit from doing less. And and the reason that I say that is because ultimately, what happens when you do too much is you. You end up half asking a lot of projects right? And
Mike Rome: to really make a start of work, you need to do the work. Your life on a on a few things that really matter. And you know I find that. You know, if you're not making time as a team whether it's just you whether you have a co-founder or whether you have a small team beyond you. If you're not making time to like, come up for for air and think and and not just like react and do stuff every minute of every day. You're not gonna make the most awful decisions.
Mike Rome: You're not gonna like, actually reflect on all of these things that have happened and what it means for sort of the next step of your business. So startups are a really windy road even for the most successful ones. And so it's really important to just build this culture to, you know.
Mike Rome: take a step back, make time to think, because ultimately it's how you play the most offense. And and, by the way, if you build a culture like this, really great 18 employees. They're they're starving for it, cause a lot of startups are just like swallowed and busyness. And
Mike Rome: not only does it hurt productivity, it hurts morale. And it's it's it's sort of a hack to build a really incredible team. Because it's really hard to do this. And most startups haven't figured it out. So anyway, that's my presentation. I'm going to try to hit video again and do some QA. But yeah, you guys can can email me anytime at mike@moonwater.studio.
Mike Rome: If you have questions on this deck once I share it out or just like general questions, as as you guys are scaling, so always love hanging with the the techstars. Crew. To. To really honest point, I've been doing it in Chicago for for many years now. So awesome to be doing it out West as well. And yeah, thanks for your time.
Lilliana Robinson: Thanks so much, Mike.
Lilliana Robinson: Okay, so we have.
Lilliana Robinson: How long you're leaving us at 11? Pst.
Mike Rome: I can hang for like 15 min. If people want.
Lilliana Robinson: Awesome. Okay? Who would like to ask some questions? This is a great opportunity.
Mike Rome: And it doesn't have to be related to the deck like, if there's anything remotely related to growth that you think I might be able to be helpful on, feel free.
Lilliana Robinson: Yeah, where are you guys getting stuck? What are you working on
Lilliana Robinson: in terms of growth? Right now, how can Mike help?
Lilliana Robinson: Yeah, like.
Mike Rome: Sorry if you guys hear my little guy, too. He's like having a day crying in the other room, so.
Lilliana Robinson: No, the air pods are great at canceling, but even if it's fine.
Alejandra Guillen: Hey, Mike, thank you so much for the presentation. It was awesome, very fast, but very awesome. I'm Ali, from aware. And we're building mental wellness platform is a wearable device coupled with an app to help people monitor their emotional state and take action about it.
Alejandra Guillen: And we're very, we're pre product. So it's very early on this question is a little bit more just to educate my my mind towards the future we want to be. We are. We are the aura, the ordering for mental wellness.
Alejandra Guillen: And as we are exploring more what aura and other wearables do, network effects are amazing. So people recommend these products to each other. And you actually, if you Google or a ring, you know, if you Google stress sleep and and a lot of the things that Aura promotes.
Alejandra Guillen: They don't even show up, you know, on your Google search like they do Instagram and network effects. How do you get to that level? I mean, what? What are your experience steps
Alejandra Guillen: to get to the point where you actually have network effects to that extent?
Mike Rome: Yeah, great, great question, and and nice to meet you the first thing I'd say is, it's like the Holy Grail, right? Like, ever, for growth, like everyone is, is sort of wanting to figure it out. One of the best things you can do is just kind of study history of like adjacent companies, or maybe direct competitors, have figured it out. So one of these companies, I advised like a year and a half ago, is this company called Hallow
Mike Rome: and pre. Pretty interesting products is, it's basically like calm for Catholics. So they they built an app to, you know, basically do meditation prayer stuff like that specifically for Catholics. And
Mike Rome: they kind of like capitalize. This idea of like building tech for religious purposes is pretty taboo. Most of stuff out there is pretty shitty they built this like, really nice app, great user experience. And it it really blew up. They've raised like a hundred 1 million bucks. And they had. They ran a super bowl ad this past year, and one of the coolest projects I did with those guys that I think was most helpful was
Mike Rome: We we realize that one of the most amazing adjacent companies to kind of talk about was shopify. So shopify had nothing to do with meditation. It had nothing to do with religion. I won't get into like exactly why we identified it as this like interesting consumer company that had a lot of parallels to us. But one of the best projects ever did from is that I spent 20 h
Mike Rome: literally going through, and just like combing through the Internet to timeline shopify's growth and try to figure out like what features or what sort of levers
Mike Rome: led to growth. So we looked all the way back to, I think, 2,013. So we looked at 2,013 through like this was in 2022 when we did it, and I spent like 20 h. And you know, we came up with like 40 things that happened on this timeline right, based on what was publicly available about shopify. And we went through it. And we first asked, like, is this credible? Do we actually think that this, like, you know, and a lot of their growth was public. So we were able to kind of timeline this stuff to their actual growth.
Mike Rome: And we went through. And we said, like, do we think the source is credible? Do we think it's legit? And then the next question we asked is like, is it applicable to how right. And then there was all this stuff that came up where we had to really clean it up right like something that worked in 2,014 chances where it wasn't gonna work in 2,022. But this was a super useful exercise for us to kind of figure out like
Mike Rome: this company that we're aspiring to be like for various reasons. Here's how they've achieved network effects right in in your case. And let's just like build out the 50 things that happen in the last 5 or 7 years and like, ask if it's still relevant. Ask if it's relevant to us. And yeah, I think wanted one mistake that I see stars make, and and when I say I see stars make just to be clear, I've made all these mistakes like being in startups.
Mike Rome: you're doing this new thing right? Like, it's inherently like, innovative, maybe kind of cutting edge. And you sometimes we like for forget that like a lot of people have solved these problems. And you think, because this thing is new, that there might not be this Comp. And in my experience, 90 to 95% of the time. Like, unless you're building.
Mike Rome: you know rockets that you're trying to send to Mars. Or, you know, something like that, like, there's usually some sort of interesting Comp out there and like interesting company, you can study. And and I'm talking about how we studied shopify to figure out, how can we be more like them? You can also like study, you know. Let let's say, like Aura was an adjacent company that made like
Mike Rome: sounds like they're a great company. But let's say they made this detrimental mistake. You can also study them to like. Figure out how you don't repeat those same mistakes. Right? So yeah, I think, like studying like, figure out.
Mike Rome: not just competitors. And sometimes it's better for adjacent companies. It's like, when I say, Jason, it's like. There's something about them that's really interesting. But they're not a direct competitor. And you think there's like these parallel other parallels.
Mike Rome: I like to study those because you tend to get I ideas outside your industry that competitors might have already done but that's a really good exercise for for figuring it out like. Don't don't try to reinvent the wheel like there's plenty of apps that have figured out network effects that are, you know, remotely related to what you're doing so I would. I would start with studying them.
Alejandra Guillen: Thank you so much.
Mike Rome: No problem.
Mike Rome: Any. You guys just fire away.
Lilliana Robinson: Yeah. Milk.
Malc - Xsauce: I didn't want to jump the queue, but I'll I'll keep. I'll keep it brief. So, Malcolm, from exhaust
Malc - Xsauce: exhaust we're B to C, we are effectively a fantasy finance app. So what that means is basically an amalgamation of Robin Hood and draft kings. So taking kind of elements of betting alternative assets. Things like that.
Malc - Xsauce: You really have my interest with the loops versus funnels.
Malc - Xsauce: And I'm curious. Yeah, just a little. This double click on that. More so, because obviously, that's what we want to do. We wanna retain customers repeated daily. Use things like that. So curious where the actual loop comes in. Is that like a spend? Is that more around the app mechanics like, where where's like the biggest or the ideal way to create that loop, is it? Yeah, I guess through Spain, is it through more of the kind of user interactions.
Mike Rome: Yeah. So there's try sharing my screen again.
Mike Rome: Cool.
Mike Rome: you guys see Google on my screen.
Mike Rome: Mal awesome hat. By the way,
Malc - Xsauce: Thanks.
Mike Rome: I would. Google, Bo Google, Brian Bell for growth loops.
Mike Rome: This would be a good one.
Mike Rome: and he kind of talks about it. Another thing to maybe Google is Brian Belfour. And like types of growth loops, because to your point there's a few, there's a few different kinds like some are paid, some are non paid. But if you just kind of Google around, I think, like, if you're thinking about the Robin Hoods at the world again to the advice I just kind of gave like studying like they they have surely figured out a loop right? Or draft kings, or whoever go study their loops. I think, like th, there's there's paid loops which basically just means like
Mike Rome: pay paid loops aren't as effective as organic ones. And I think for a very social experience like yours, like you want to be leaning into this idea of organic loops. So if you just kind of like, yeah, you just Google Brian Bell for growth loops like he's gonna break down like a few different types. He kind of like coined the term has some really good ones. But I would also study like Robin Hood and draft kings. It's amazing what you can find out there, like people writing essays about these companies to to figure it out. But the the whole idea of loops versus funnels is like.
Mike Rome: it's it's kind of like it's a little bit like the referral lever in a funnel like, how do you get the user to become the marketer for you?
Mike Rome: Right? So you don't have to do the marketing yourself. That's really the whole idea of a loop. So yeah, leaning into, you know, if you're sort of a hybrid of finance app and a a betting app
Mike Rome: how did they do it and figure out like how that might be applicable to you? And, by the way, don't just copy verbatim like sometimes figuring out how they did it. Can also like inspire new ideas right like, whenever I go and study competitors, which I think is an underutilized tactic. I would say.
Mike Rome: we're doing this for inspiration versus prescription, right? Like we're not gonna just run the same thing. But if they've run things that have crushed. Surely we want to know about them, and ask ourselves, how applicable is it to our business if we don't have to reinvent the wheel. It's not. But maybe it also just inspires the sort of like idea where we kind of build on that, and we do it better.
Malc - Xsauce: Awesome. Thanks so much, Mike, really appreciate that.
Mike Rome: No problem, no problem.
Lilliana Robinson: Snow.
Snow Lee / Runbear: Hi, Mike, first. Thank you very much for the great session. Yeah, it helps us a lot a lot.
Snow Lee / Runbear: So we are rumbaire. We help customers with enhancing their workflows by
Snow Lee / Runbear: helping them use custom chipt in their communication platforms like slack.
Snow Lee / Runbear: So basically, we yeah, it's a software as a service company.
Snow Lee / Runbear: and then we are tracking the users we go for a week. So it's actually the opposite question of what Lisa
Snow Lee / Runbear: asked before. So we are tracking the numbers week over week, and it's quite frustrating and overwearing sometimes. Not. Sometimes it's quite often
Snow Lee / Runbear: it increases my anxiety. So are are we doing good this week, are we? What? What did we wrong last week? They kind of questions. So I'd like to get some advice from you about is focus. And of course, the the churn. It happens monthly, because we yeah get the the month. We we support the monthly subscription. So I'd like to understand if tracking week over week
Snow Lee / Runbear: the to check the growth and to to apply our learnings is good or not.
Mike Rome: Sure sure. So no nice to meet. Let me try to answer the question and tell me if I did, or we can. We can kind of keep going. So the first thing I would say is like,
Mike Rome: It's really easy to be anxious and startups like again 1 min. You're on top of the world. The next minute you're just like your souls been crushed.
Mike Rome: And it's really really important to find ways to not get demoralized, because again, like stamina is so big it's so important. And if you don't constantly sort of like.
Mike Rome: you know, I I might be giving contrarian advice here. You don't have to believe it, but I I like the idea of again. How do you slow down the lease? How do you move at a natural pace. Because I think then, like you, the best startups they just, you know, like the dirty little secret is they just
Mike Rome: they just found ways not to die long enough like that. There's a really good Paul Graham. I say about that right? Like everyone likes to talk about the sexy things they did. That's really how it works. And so the first thing I would say is like you, wanna like, try to mitigate anxiety in the startup. Another thing I would do is I would I would to to the to Lisa point is like, Yeah, figure out like, what is
Mike Rome: what is natural expected usage of your product like? Do you expect people to use it every day? You expect them to use it every week? You expect them to use it every month, and you want to sort of build your analytics around whatever that regular cadence is. The best way to figure that out is to talk users, you know and I I've said this probably 10 times. Now talk to users like I just like
Mike Rome: I I've never seen that not be a productive use of time, especially early on right. So so that's what I would do. To to figure out what the regular cadence is. And then, you know, snow depending on. If you wanna go raise more money. If you wanna kind of bootstrap this thing beyond techstars, I would. There's probably some incredible resources at techstars. I do a little bit of like Smb. Sass. But I'm not like the I'm not like the foremost expert by any means.
Mike Rome: I would talk to users, I would figure out, let's let's say you get user feedback, like people want to use this weekly, or people want to use it monthly. I would go talk to some of the Sas experts in the techstars network and say, like.
Mike Rome: Do you think we can build like a venture viable business off of this sort of cadence of usage.
Mike Rome: And if the answer is no, then you're gonna have to like, rethink the product and like, figure out like, How do you engineer, you know, sort of a user experience that leads to more frequent usage. But maybe they'll be, you know. Maybe you'll find people that are like, you know, on average people use this thing twice a month, and hey, Snow, you should check out this other Sas company that's used to 3 times a month. It's a really good comp for you guys. And maybe that's okay. Right? A lot of it comes back to like again.
Mike Rome: the unit economics like, can you make the unit economics of your Saas business work if people only use it twice a month, right? Maybe answer is, yes, maybe the answer is no but I would be like very hell dense on talking to users to figure out what is natural usage, and then talking to just like the text of networks, credible, right? Like talk to Saas veterans, and and just be brutally honest like. This is what they told me. This is how often they're going to use it today, based on what we have.
Mike Rome: Is it good enough, or is it not? And, you know, talk to a few people you trust, and and then kind of decide on on where to go from there. But
Mike Rome: yeah, try to like, above all, like, I know, it wasn't really your question like try to mitigate the anxiety. I know it's it's really easier said than done. But yeah, you're you're gonna be grounded for a while here. So you wanna find ways to to have a release and then mitigate that for sure.
Snow Lee / Runbear: That totally makes sense. That helps a lot. Thank you.
Mike Rome: No problem.
Lilliana Robinson: Perfect, Lisa, and then we'll see if Ali, we have time to get to you.
Mike Rome: Yeah, we can do 2 more. No problem.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: I'll try. Be quick. Thanks so much, Mike. This is super helpful I wanna pick up on what Mark was talking about a little bit, and then, maybe in a different context, whether funnel or wheel. I know we all trying to be super scrappy right now, but in your opinion. Is there ever a version where it makes sense to spend money on ads? Or do you try to do all organic
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: for those first early customers? So you said 50, I think, to test.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: what's your take on that? How to get those.
Mike Rome: If you have a little, if you have a little money to spend like I'm totally, actually, I'm like paid an organic agnostic. If you're even if you're pre product market fit. But like, I would just be very clear and intentional around. Why you're doing paid. You're doing paid to learn right like, have we built something to get? Have we built something to can confirm? Can we confirm that, like our ideal customer, profile is X right, or can we like actually
Mike Rome: drive revenue right now, right? Like you're doing paid to learn this really important thing. That's gonna sort of dictate what you do next in the business like you're not. You're not doing paid to grow right now you're doing paid to learn. That's that's really what it comes down to. And I would be really clear around like, what's the most important thing that you need to learn right now to get to the next level.
Mike Rome: And if you're gonna do paid acquisition to learn those things. I'm fine with it. I just like you're not doing paid to grow maybe maybe you have a product, Lisa, and
Mike Rome: you know, May, maybe you're doing paid because you want to learn if you're at product market fit, right? You want to bring some users in, and you want to retain them. But still you're not doing it to grow. You're doing it to figure out if you have like a product that pertains right? So either way, it's like, if you're pre product market fit like I'm fine. If you spend money, if if you have it like, like, maybe you want to get an idea of the unit economics like I just told you, right like you're trying to figure out
Mike Rome: is once a year or once every other year enough to have, like an Ltv. To cost, to acquire, to build like a scalable business. Maybe you just wanna go acquire some people to get a ballpark idea of what the cap is right to give an idea of what the Ltv. Needs to be like to me. Those are all really fine reasons to to do paid cause you're trying to learn like, if you're onto something or not. But you're just not doing it to grow. If your pre- product market fit. Does that make sense.
Lisa Hennessy (she/her), Travaras: Absolutely. Yeah, thank you.
Alejandra Guillen: Mike, me again. Super. Quick on on the scientific method that you suggest to run test and experiments. Do you use any specific tool that helps track all these hypotheses and and and outcomes and everything else to be consistent, because sometimes, you know, you use Google, excel, or whatever, and that makes it difficult to track and compare it and be consistent. So
Alejandra Guillen: any any
Alejandra Guillen: advice there, the.
Mike Rome: Yeah. So a few. And again, you know, I talked to other people. I'm a little bit of a contrarian with tools. I think most people use way, too many tools, and it actually like slows them down.
Mike Rome: so like, when it comes to like, okay, the scientific method. For, like, you know, figuring out levers to grow across marketing sales and product. You can get really far with a Google doc and a spreadsheet.
Mike Rome: If you prefer notion. Great if you want to have it, be a little bit more like producty and organized. I love trello but I just like to keep things simple in general, and like I'm I I would. I worked on a company earlier this year that was doing over a million dollars in revenue per employee incredible company. And they were like running the business off of Google docs and sheets still. So I just like.
Mike Rome: there's a lot of like fanciness out there. And I just you know it's just me. I I have a little bit of an aversion to it, cause it hasn't been helpful. I think that tools like get in the way more than they help. So I keep it really simple. And then, like, you know, let's say you're recording learnings in a Google, Doc, and you do it for 4 months. And you get to this point where it's like, Oh, this is like really hard to keep track of like, you know, bookmarks in a Google Doc, it's like, it's unorganized. And now it's 50 pages long, like.
Mike Rome: I would rather get to this place where it's like
Mike Rome: we're kind of bleeding on this process. It's no longer working. Let's find a tool like I like to feel pain before I go out and find something fancier. Because, like the amazing thing about sheets and docs, or even again, if you like, notion, great or something simple like Trello is like
Mike Rome: you could just get started so quickly, right? Like the tool doesn't
Mike Rome: like the tool like doesn't hinder starting so that that would be my sort of sort of hot. Take on cool tools.
Alejandra Guillen: Thank you.
Mike Rome: Cool, I think. Antonio's got his hand up, and I can do another question.
Antonio Forenza - AWEAR, Med: Hi, Mike, thanks for your input. I'm Antonio, co-founder of aware same company as Ali, or our ring for mental wellbeing. so we are pre-product, and we're thinking of star growth journey with the a craft funding campaign.
Antonio Forenza - AWEAR, Med: So what are your thoughts about crowdfunding as a means to boost initial growth.
Mike Rome: Yeah, I mean, I think they're. I don't know much about them. But if you guys do some googling, or even like chat gpt around like, you know. This is what our product does like. Who are the most successful, you know, I would just probably chat, gpt it like, say, this is what our product does like. What are the most successful Kickstarter companies who've done this, or I don't know where other people are doing crowdfunding these days. And then, you know, once you get a list of companies, I would be asking like, what's like the what's like the crowdfunding checklist right like the playbook to run
Mike Rome: but it's it's a good way to like you know, validate that you're onto something for sure.
Mike Rome: without deluding the business. I know some people run into problems where it's like it kind of blows up. And then, like they haven't actually like figured out the logistics and the manufacturing of it, and it kind of becomes a nightmare. But I would just like be researching all of that stuff to make sure you've kind of covered your basis. But again, we're going back to that advice of like study, the companies who who've done it. And if you think it's applicable to you guys, yeah, maybe it's worth a shot.
Mike Rome: Awesome. I have one more thing for you guys. If you want shameless plug I post about startup 6 days a week on Linkedin. I don't use Twitter. This is the only place I am. So if you want to, just like here.
Mike Rome: I basically just try to write stuff that I wish someone told me 5 to 10 years ago. So no pressure obviously on Linkedin. And I also have this newsletter called the scale. Mba, it's just moonwater dot studio slash scale. Mba. I just started it this year, but I have about 1,900
Mike Rome: founders and and Vcs and early stage employees who read it. So it's free. No pressure. But it's 2 parts. Basically, I do like a 30 day crash course and growth. So you get like 13 or 14 emails in 30 days. And then after that, every 10 days, I do an interview with someone really cool, interesting and startups people who've sold startups for 500 million dollars. Other people who are like fastest growing startups in the country
Mike Rome: like, I said, really cool metrics like 1 million bucks per employee people who care about culture. Yeah. So so if you want to check it out after the 30 days of running the gauntlet on like the growth sprint. I I send those every 10 days, so no pressure. But it's just new water, dot studio slash scale, Mba, and then you can find me on Linkedin, too.
Lilliana Robinson: That's really cool, Mike. I haven't seen that before. Your newsletter.
Mike Rome: Yeah, yeah, I. Yeah, it's like people. I've gotten good feedback so so far. So it's a little bit of a unique like 2 part process. The interviews are they're a lot of work. So I'm thinking about done about 10 of them I'm thinking about. If I need to like, maybe
Mike Rome: kind of pivot it. But people really like them. And I've gotten to meet some pretty cool people. So and they've definitely like taught me a lot about startups as well, so.
Lilliana Robinson: Yeah, every 10 days. That's impressive.
Mike Rome: Hey!
Lilliana Robinson: And then is your email, mike@moonwater.studio. People are trying to get.
Mike Rome: End it.
Mike Rome: Yup, and then my, my other company. You don't need to worry about it. But yeah, we do more tactical growth stuff. I have a partner for that, but I'll be startup advisory and
Mike Rome: fractional operating, I do with startups. Just moonwater dot studio. So, and then mike@moonwater.studio is my email.
Lilliana Robinson: Okay. Well, yeah.
Mike Rome: Thank you for having me shoot me note anytime. And yeah, keep me posted on progress. So.
Lilliana Robinson: Amazing. I'm sure many will reach out. Thank you so much, Mike. This was awesome. Thanks for your time. We'll be in touch.
Mike Rome: Okay, Lily. Liliana, I'll shoot you over there. I gotta run right now, but I'll shoot you over the deck to to share out.
Lilliana Robinson: Oh, yeah, that'd be great. Thank you. Okay, thank you.
Mike Rome: Thanks for having me everyone.
Mike Rome: Thanks, Emily.